# Score matching with Missing/Marginal Samples

This is the code for the paper Score Matching with Missing Data which has been accepted as a spotlight coference paper to ICML 2025 and can be found here: [https://arxiv.org/pdf/2506.00557](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2506.00557) . The repository is organised as follows:

- `MSM`: Contains all the code to implement Marginal Score matching as well as any other methods we've discussed.
- `HPC`: Contains all the code to run the experiments. Python code is in subfolders within this and bashscripts to run this python code can be found in the `bashscripts` folder.
- `simulated_data`: Contains all the results from our experiments on simulated data.
- `real_world_experiments`: Contains all the results from our experiments on real world data.
- `plotcode`: Contains all the notebooks used to generate the plots in the paper.
- `plots`: Contains all the plots generated by the notebooks in the `plotcode` folder.

## `real_world_experiments`
Within the real world experiments there are notebooks for the S\&P 100 example and the yeast example. These notebooks both prep the data for running in the experiments and demonstrate single runs for each of the experiments.

The `RealData` subfolder contains all of the data used in these experiments both raw and tidied.

The `Results` subfolder contains all of the results from the experiments.

## `HPC`
Any of the python files can be run directly from the command line. They each take 2 arguments, the first is how many repeats of the experiment to run and the second is what index over the dependent variable (e.g. sample size, missingness probability, number of star-centres etc.) to run the experiment over. The bash scripts in the `bashscripts` folder are used to run these python files over each index of the dependent variable.

The experiments are split across 5 folders:
- `GGM` This contains code to test the method on simulated Gaussian Graphical Model estimation problem
- `ICA` This contains code to do parameter estimation for and Independent Component Analysis (ICA) inspired problem.
- `NormalEstimation` This contains code to do parameter estimation for truncated and untruncated normal distributions.
- `snp100` This contains code to do Gaussian Graphical Model estimation on the S\&P 100 data.
- `yeast` This contains code to do Gaussian Graphical Model estimation on the yeast data.
with the bash scripts in the corresponding `bashscripts` subfolder.

## `MSM`
The Marginal Score Matching modules is based off of PyTorch and designed to implement all of our Marginal Score Matching methods alongside the EM method of Uehara et al. (2020) and an adapted version of the MissDiff method of  Ouyang et al. (2023) 
See the notebooks in the `real_world_experiments` folder for examples of how to use the MSM package. 
The package has 4 submodules:
### `losses` 
This is where all the losses and pseudo losses are for each score matching method are defined.
### `models` 
This contains all of the score matching models (in `density_models.py`/ `density_models` submodule) as well as all of the importance weighting and variaional models (in the `variational_models` submodule)
### `runners`
This is where each of the methods is actually defined. Each method has its own runner object. Upon initialisation these take in the score model, importance weighting/variational model, and the optimizers for one or both of these depending on the method.
They then have the following methods:
- `init_dataset` which initialises the dataset either takes in 1 value if it is a method for uncorrupted data (the data in a tensor) or 2 values if it is a method for corrupted data (the corrupted data and the data mask both as tensors).
- `set_regularisers` Optionally sets the regularisers the score model or the variational model where present.
- `set_schedulers` Optionally sets the scedulers for the learning rate of the optimisers of the score model or the variational model where present (Note: the scheduler is called on each training step rather than at the end of an epoch).
- `set_grad_opts` Optionally sets the gradient options (e.g. gradient clipping) for the score model or the variational model where present.
- `train` Trains the model for a given number of epochs and or itertions and takes snapshots at given intervals.

### `utils`
Additional helpful utilisies for data manipulation or training. All data manipulation functions are in the `data` submodule.

# References
Ouyang, Y., Xie, L., Li, C., and Cheng, G. MissDiff: Training diffusion models on tabular data with missing values.
In _ICML 2023 workshop on structured probabilistic inference & generative modeling_, 2023. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=S435pkeAdT.

Uehara, M., Matsuda, T., and Kim, J. K. Imputation estimators for unnormalized models with missing data.
In Chiappa, S. and Calandra, R. (eds.), _Proceedings
of the twenty third international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics_, volume 108 of _Proceedings of machine learning research_, pp. 831–841. PMLR,
August 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v108/uehara20b.html.
